(electronic music playing)
Now we are going to talk about timeouts and intervals.
So if you wanna run something after five seconds
we're going to use a timeout.
If you wanna run something every five seconds
you use an interval.
They both work exactly the same way.
Let's dive into them now.
So we've got this intervals that html,
I'm just in my playground folder
and we get to ourselves a script tag.
Now, when you want to run something, you simply
just type setTimeout and that takes a couple of arguments.
Now, this setTimeout, where did that come from?
Is that just a function that's available to us?
And the answer is yes.
It is a globally scoped, it's actually a method,
because if you take a look at it,
it's actually window.setTimeout,
but you will learn you don't need to type the window.
when you are just accessing globally available API's.
I recommend not using window.setTimeout
and you may see that out there.
The reason why is that often you do need run the same code
that you're running in the browser in Node.js.
And Node.js doesn't have a concept of a window.
So, it does have a timeout and interval,
so you just simply say setTimeout, not window.setTimeout.
Now, setTimeout takes two things.
The first thing is a callback and the second thing
is a number of milliseconds to run it after.
So often what you will see is you'll have somebody
just give an anonymous function right here,
and we'll just say console.log done.
And then the second argument of timeout would be
how many milliseconds should I run this after?
So, if I give myself 500 milliseconds,
this will run half a second
after the JavaScript has started.
So, pretty simple, just like AdEvent Listener
you can either pass in a anonymous function
or you can write a function outside of it.
So, let's say function buzzer and inside that,
we will console.log (mimicking buzzer) as a buzzer sound.
And then right here instead of passing
an anonymous function, we pass a reference to a function.
Just like that, and there we go.
After 500 milliseconds, this thing is going to set off.
One kind of interesting thing about timers
is if I will work to console.log starting
and then console.log finishing.
Underneath, what's gonna happen here?
We're gonna console.log starting.
Are we gonna wait for half second and then do finishing?
Let's see.
Ah, so, what's happening here,
is that JavaScript will run here, in console.log starting,
it will set off the timer and then it will cue it up.
And it'll say, "Okay, I have this function called buzzer
"and I will call it after 500 milliseconds
"but I've got stuff to do.
"I'm gonna keeping going."
And that is what is referred to
as a asynchronous nature of JavaScript.
As soon as it lines up this code to be run,
it will go off on to the next line of code,
and only come back to this, when it is done.
That's why we call a callback.
'Cause we come back and call it at a latter point in time.
So, that's good to know that,
even if you trying to wait for 500 milliseconds,
the rest of JavaScript will keep on running.
Now, when we're gonna get into promises and a async await,
I'll show you how to actually do that,
because it's a pretty common thing where you do want await
for a number of milliseconds before you go ahead and do it.
Now, let's talk about intervals.
Intervals work exactly the same.
We say, setInterval and you can pass it a reference
to a function like buzzer
and how often you would like to run it.
So, if I say, every 100 milliseconds I wish to run this.
You'll see that it then runs over and over
every 100 milliseconds.
Now, there is one sorta got you with this intervals,
is that if you were using this to animate something
on a page, or you are using it to check something every,
let's say, every two seconds
you wanted to checking something.
What happens is that, it actually doesn't run immediately.
It only runs after the first two seconds have elapsed.
There is no option to tell the interval to run right away,
but then, also run after two seconds.
So, if you do want that sort of functionality,
we can code our own interval.
Where we can make a function called setImmediateInterval.
And it will take two arguments.
The funcToRun, that's the function to run
and the number of milliseconds.
So, we're just making our own third little interval here,
and what we do is right away call that function.
So what we'll do is we will just take the function
that is passed in, so, funcToRun.
You might be like "Where this funcToRun coming from?"
I'll explain that in just a second.
Then we go ahead and run a regular interval,
which is setInterval.
And we pass it the funcToRun and we pass it the number
of milliseconds that have then interned in passing here.
Finally, we are going to return this
and I will tell you why we return
that has to do with stopping intervals
from actually running.
Then, what we can do is we can go to the setInterval
and swap it out with the setImmediateInterval function
that we just made.
And you'll see that it runs immediately
and then once every two seconds
it will additionally be logged into it.
Now, what is going on with this funcToRun?
I know we've cover this a whole bunch,
but I know that's a huge tripping point
for those who need JavaScript.
So, this is kind of a cool one because we made a function
that has an argument,
or sorry, it takes a parameter of another function,
so if you have a function,
that one of the arguments say you pass is a function,
it works exactly like you are passing a number or a string
or anything like that.
But in this case, we just take the argument funcToRun
and we call it.
So, in the case of here,
the function that gets passed in is buzzer
but if we could totally call another time
for every 200 milliseconds
and pass it another function call sayHi.
Console.log, hey and then simply just pass it sayHi.
So, in both of these cases, I'm passing functions.
And whenever it's called, it just get transformed
into this parameter called funcToRun
where we then access to either run it
or to pass it even one level further into our setInterval.
So, timeouts and intervals are fairly straightforward.
The only sort of gotcha is that it will not run immediately,
so you can code your own little immediate one,
which is pretty handy to do.
The only other thing you need to know is that
if you want to clear a timer or clear an interval,
you must save the reference to that timer
or to that interval.
If I were to, let me rid of all that stuff that is running.
Get rid of that.
So, here let's make a function called...
destroy.
Maybe after, if someone doesn't click
for five seconds we'll destroy the webpage.
So that will be document.body.innerHTML is equal to,
let's just do like a paragraph tag, destroyed.
Then what we'll do, is we'll say setTimeout destroy.
Let's say, after two seconds, we'll run destroy.
Destroyed, that is obviously not all that interesting,
but you can imagine some sort of thing,
you have to hit the save button within two seconds
or something is going to happen.
Now, what if we were to make this five seconds
and then we'll say, "Okay, if somebody doesn't click
"in five seconds then we are going to run this.
"But if someone does click, then we want to clear it."
So, what we can do here,
is we'll say window. add an event listener.
We're gonna listen for a click
and we are going to run the function,
let's say, console.log you clicked you saved the world.
This is such a silly example,
but I hope you get the point where I want to wait
for five seconds and if somebody clicks I want
to stop this timer.
So, how do I stop the timer from running?
Well, what you can do is you can save reference
to this timer.
So const bombTimer and if we were to console.log
that bombTimer, what are we gonna get?
Two.
What does two mean?
Well, two is just a reference to all
of the current timers that are on the page.
To you it doesn't really meaning anything,
but to the browser it does mean quite a bit.
And if just take a look at the type of that,
it's just a regular number.
But if we save reference to that timer number
in a variable what we can do,
we'll take the clearTimeout and pass it reference
to the bombTimer and what that will do
is it will stop the timer from running.
I clicked, you will see the destroy never shows up.
If I just refresh the page, wait for five seconds...
it goes destroyed.
But if I click we go ahead and clear a timer.
So always, it's not always, but if you for some reason,
need to stop your timer, save reference to it in a variable,
so that you can go ahead and stop it.
There is no other way of clearing the timer
without having saved reference to it in a variable,
which is a number.
The intervals working exactly the same way.
So, setInterval...
Function...
Console.log.
Let's just do a poop emoji...
and console.log, hehe.
We want to run that every ten milliseconds.
This is gonna be bonkers.
It's just going forever and forever.
Now, if I wanted to clear that,
then I could just save a reference to it.
So const poopInterval is equal to.
Let's see, do we have it, access to it here?
poopInterval, there it is.
So if I run clearInterval...
that will stop that poopInterval from actually running.
Now, one thing I like to do often is,
I run and run this every 100 milliseconds,
but after three seconds I want to stop it entirely.
Now, if I want to clear that after five seconds,
I simply make a setTimeout.
We have a function...
and that will run after five seconds.
And we simply clearInverval and pass it the poopInterval.
So now, I don't want five seconds,
let's make it three seconds, now it just going like crazy.
And you see that after three seconds
it has totally stopped.
So, those are intervals and timers and clearing them.
Their pretty simple, very helpful in JavaScript.
Coming up we are going to be learning about promises
and async await.
Not just yet, but that's sort of last piece of logic
and flow control that we haven't learned just yet.
But we're gonna wait till to get to Ajax
and request to be able to do that.